foreign the person's willingness to
embrace intensity will Mark the amount
of change that they will
feel in their life in the short term
it's like it's a great leading indicator
welcome to the art of accomplishment
where we explore how deepening
connection with ourselves and others
leads to creating the life we want with
enjoyment and ease I'm Brett Kistler
here today with my co-host Joe Hudson
[Music]
Good morning Joe hey how's it going
doing well it's actually afternoon here
afternoon oh yeah morning here morning
there Hawaii California yeah yeah I hear
you're taking your daughter on a road
trip yeah yeah she just got 15 and a
half she got the learner's permit and I
was like
hey uh how do you wanna how do you wanna
learn to drive she was like let's drive
across country so we're gonna drive from
California to New York oh wow yeah I'm
really I'm really excited for it because
I you know you get these moments with
your kids especially as they get older
where you get to
like really deeply sink in with them on
on a topic and and those road trips are
the best way to do it three days ago I'm
sitting in this uh Cafe you know covet's
opened up sitting in a cafe with my 12
year old and we're talking about
embracing intensity
in this Cafe where she's like trying to
figure this out like what what do I mean
when I say to her like oh like hey
you're running away from a feeling there
like lean into the feeling and we're
having this conversation it's just like
one of those epic conversations you have
with your kids every once in a while and
there was this lady who was sitting near
us and it was like watching her jaw just
like Drop like what the hell is
happening like how is this conversation
happening between a dad and a 12 year
old it was really amazing and it was
that conversation actually which is the
reason that I said to you hey let's talk
about embracing intensity is that when
you told her that she's going to be
doing this drive all in one go in like
36 hours
no different daughter the younger
daughter is oh okay the embracing
conversation oh yeah the 12 year old's
not doing the driving yeah no and that
wouldn't be embracing intensity that
would be creating intensity yeah an
important distinction big distinction
yeah yeah so this this is something that
comes up a lot in our courses as as a
principle for ESF and kind of a
principle for any of the courses and
it's one of the things that really uh
kind of attracted me with my Air Sports
and like kind of extreme like
adventuring background which is like
okay yeah I'm brace intensity yeah let's
do this so like can you for the audience
Define what it what do you mean by
embracing intensity as opposed to what I
just suggested on the road trip you know
creating an intensity so embracing
intensity assumes that there is never a
moment when there isn't some intensity
to embrace that there's really nothing
to create in the situation so
and I use the word intensity so that
people don't think like it's difficulty
because I find that when people once
people really move through embracing say
their anger or their sadness or their
fear that they find it's more
challenging even to embrace things like
peace and joy and to allow that in so
the intensity is really about the thing
inside of you right now that has some
discomfort or it's like it's it's like
being asked to expand in a way that is
slightly uncomfortable and it's it's
embracing that and I think the the best
way to think about it is if you just
close your eyes for a minute
and take a deep breath
and you say am I bracing or am I
embracing
and that's like the felt sense of it the
felt sense of it is like
how much am I allowing my experience to
occur and how much am I resisting my
experience yeah that kind of points to
an important thing where the concept of
creating intensity like if people are
learning as they they go through these
courses and they do this work and they
find there's a lot of intensity in them
and so then they're like when there's
intensity that must mean there's growth
so I'm going to start by creating
intensity and you could tell like if
you're if you're creating intensity and
not just letting it come up there is a
bracing to it it's like okay here it
comes ready for this intensity right
also I mean I like creating intensity
every once in a while don't get me wrong
I think it's a really useful tool but
it's not a principle to live life by
meaning well I mean you know what we've
done in some of these courses and it can
be quite intense and so I don't steer
away from creating it but it's not
that's not a Surefire way for
transformation but
what is a surefired way for
transformation is embracing intensity as
a matter of fact I was sitting with a
whole bunch of CEOs and we were
discussing
what do we want to be able to measure
and I said well one of the things I
would love to be able to measure is
transformation in different ways and
they're like What's the leading
indicator of transformation in your mind
I was like oh the the person's
willingness to embrace intensity will
Mark the amount of change that they will
feel in their life in a short term it's
like it's a great leading indicator this
seems like this is one reason perhaps
like one of the benefits of embracing
intensity what are reasons why we might
want to drift towards living in this
principle yeah it's funny because my
daughter asked me the same question when
we were sitting across she was like what
are the reasons and I came up with three
and then as we were talking there was a
fort that showed up so I'm going to give
you the three because those are the only
ones I remember and then we'll see if
the fourth one shows up in this
conversation as well but it's incredibly
good for decision making it's incredibly
good for Joy like increasing the amount
of joy that you feel
and it's incredibly good for
um Effectiveness oh I have the fourth
one has come that is really good at
Effectiveness and it's really good at
curbing unhealthy patterns
so those are the reasons to do it okay
so you've got like making decisions
let's let's start with that first one
then can you elaborate on that further
yeah this one I think I've even talked
about in a different podcast but it's
basically our decision making is
actually an emotional situation it's not
an intellectual one we're not making an
intellectual decisions so
you know in 2012 the guy wrote a book
um called Descartes air where he shows
that if you take the emotional center of
the brain out of a person they'll cease
to make decisions even if their IQ stays
the same it'll take them a half an hour
to decide what color pen to use or four
hours to have lunch
so what that means is we're making
decisions as a way to feel what we want
to feel means that we want to feel good
and we want to feel loved and we don't
want to feel like a failure and we don't
want to feel
shame so we
make decisions based on that and we're
using our logic to figure out which way
we're going to feel so the key to Great
decision making isn't
logically thinking it through or being
non-emotional it's actually being
completely willing to feel any emotional
state
so if you're doing something if you're
scared to take risks because you'll fail
or you're scared to speak your truth
because you're scared you won't be loved
or if you're more commonly scared to
take a risk because that much the joy of
success would be overwhelming to you and
you'd feel like it'd be taken away from
you so you avoid that feeling of
accomplishment
which seems antithetical to people but
it happens all the time
then if you're willing to feel all that
stuff and you learn to embrace all that
intensity then you make decisions far
more clearly so there seems to be a link
here between emotions and intensity like
for for many of us to feel an emotion
is intense and to feel more emotion
feels more intense and this is our
common pattern and tends to be that we
suppress it at some point yes before it
reaches some threshold that we're afraid
will be dysregulated or
like lose our there is no real
intensity in an action there's only an
intensity and a feeling physical or
emotional
so you know if you were jumping off a
cliff and you didn't have any emotional
experience it wouldn't be intense with
or without a parachute outside of maybe
the wind on your face and like that that
experience and we know psychologically
speaking that we make decisions based on
the feeling that we get from the
decision making and particularly if I if
I have this right see if I can remember
it correctly that it's the avoidance of
negative
feelings that is more powerful in our
in the way that we make decision make
then the positive reward even though
positive reward will change Behavior
quicker
if you look at the way people act it's
like trying to avoid negative feelings
is actually more powerful yeah it's a
really good one I mean looking back in
my life the times where I felt in the
flow with the with the universe were the
times that I was just following what I
actually wanted and the times that I was
avoiding what I didn't want or emotions
was when I found myself feeling the most
lost and disconnected and so like back
to decision making something that's
really important for decision making is
being context aware so you can decide
like okay who am I going to hire for
this particular role and then you could
also ask yourself what's important about
hiring somebody and something we talked
about in the feel over figure episode in
the AOA series was how our emotions
create the context in which our logic
works and so becoming aware of what that
context is
oh I'm afraid of my business failing I'm
afraid of being perceived as a failure
I'm afraid of being abandoned I'm afraid
of my partner leaving me recognizing the
context within which we're making
decisions helps us
process that underlying context to
allow us to make a different set of
decisions because we're aware of the
underlying pattern yeah just
intellectually that's true and and then
on a more physical or emotional level
what is also happening is the more we
embrace it the more sensitive we become
to it and the more sensitive we become
to it the more aware we we are of it so
when I first started and we've had an
episode about this too I think where
it's like you didn't think you felt fear
for a while and then you're like holy
crap I'm feeling it all the time and
it's like it's the same thing with my
world it was like I'm not feeling that
emotion and then oh wow I am feeling it
and so you just become more and more
sensitive to these emotional states
from embracing intensity yeah yeah so
we'll make that a sub category number
five for for reasons is that increased
sensitivity is amazing because it's not
just a sensitivity towards your own but
it's your sensitivity towards others so
you'll be in a conversation and with the
counterparty say in a business situation
and you're so aware of their emotional
state because you're so aware of yours
and it's it's like an incredible thing
to be able to hang out with people and
be aware of that in a way that allows
you to create healthy amazing
relationships yeah it makes you more
perceptive to you know the energy in the
room yeah yeah exactly so so moving on
to what's something along the lines of
curbing addiction or stopping unhealthy
patterns yeah so the thing about all
addictive Cycles is that there's a
moment where you're feeling something
that you don't want to feel that you
move to the addiction
right so it's like I don't want to feel
the want for a cigarette would bring me
to the cigarette or I don't want to feel
the negative voice in my head brings me
to
or the shame that the negative voice in
the head brings to me I don't want to
feel that therefore I'm going to move to
television or I don't want to feel out
of control so I move to anger but if
you're good with feeling all those
things then there's no reason to move to
the addiction
and there's no reason to particularly
have the shame around the addiction so
if you just feel into it it really helps
curb negative behaviors so this this is
speaking to addictions but also it can
be any kind of behavioral patterns that
we have so like drama triangle patterns
like I'm not willing to feel my
helplessness
so I try to avoid that by solving
everyone's problem and infantilizing
them right yeah so that's the second way
the second way in which it curves
negative behavior patterns isn't just
the addiction it's the
it's this thing where if I am used to be
if I got taught from my family hey I'm
going to be emotionally abandoned then
I'm going out into the world trying to
avoid that emotional abandonment that
feeling of emotional abandonment and the
way that I'm trying to avoid it I'll
recreate it so for instance I used to
when I was recreating the pattern of
emotional abandonment I would get angry
whenever I saw that I was starting to
get abandoned as a way to avoid feeling
that feeling obviously the anger made
more people abandon me because who wants
to be around someone who's yelling at
them and therefore I'd invite it in if
you just go oh I'm gonna feel that I'm
gonna feel that abandonment I'm gonna
sit in that I'm gonna learn how to make
friends with that learn how to fall in
love with that then you don't really
recreate the pattern over and over again
because what's happening in our system
is like it's like we're a cell that's
trying to get back to homeostasis
and if we weren't allowed to feel
something we're going to recreate that
negative pattern in our life over and
over and over again until we feel it and
then once we felt it then we don't have
to recreate the pattern and so you see
this happen all the time and people
recreating the patterns all to avoid a
Feeling
as soon as in my work all the time I see
this as soon as someone fully falls in
love with the feeling they're trying to
avoid the pattern stops the negative
pattern it's the quickest way to stop a
negative pattern in your life yeah yeah
so it brings back to a metaphor that
I've had for emotions which is that they
seem to be the way for our nervous
system and for ourselves to
self-organize itself back into
homeostasis and the avoidance of them is
these patterns we've learned like an
electric fence with a dog where you
teach the dog that if it goes near this
edge of the property it's going to get
shocked and eventually the fence can be
turned off and the dog just won't go
there even though through that fence
lies freedom and each of our emotional
movements is the system trying to find
homeostasis and to the extent that we
avoid them
we're blocking it yeah and I like the
the idea of the electric fence too
because
if you actually
touch the electric fence it's
uncomfortable but it doesn't actually
harm you
right and what's different than with the
emotions than electric fence is that the
emotions actually become more and more
comfortable that they change and so one
of the greatest things about embracing
intensity is that
when the emotions are welcomed they feel
very different in the system that the
discomfort of most emotions negative or
positive is the resistance to them it's
not the actual emotion themselves
sadness in itself is quite joyful
I remember in AOA once where somebody
was talking about how they learned to
enjoy their own sadness and how it like
opened up this Floodgate of sadness and
moved all this trauma out of their
system similarly like you can have a
deep joy for it and it and it changes
it's like sadness doesn't look the same
way it'll go from maybe like poor me to
just like a deep grieving in gratitude
anger will move from uh maybe like a
passive aggression or like a to a like
no this isn't gonna I'm not gonna allow
this to happen right now
so as we learn to embrace the intensity
those emotions become so much more fluid
and they become and they change and
they're so much more comfortable
and they don't take control of us the
way that resisted emotions do yeah yeah
it's interesting that resistance is
really about the dissonance like if
If part of our system is trying to move
towards homeostasis in One Direction and
the other part of our system is pushing
against it in an equal and opposite
direction not wanting it then not only
does it persist but it's also just
increasing stress fractively throughout
our body and our emotional system and
our thoughts yeah wow yeah I haven't
thought of it that way but exactly
that's cool yeah so I guess that's
benefit six so we're on yeah is that it
changes the way your emotional
experience is far more fluid and I guess
that would have impact on your body too
like a lot of the diseases that come
that are associated with Aces like
adverse childhood experience scores a
lot of that just comes from there being
a lot of chronic dissonance in the
emotional and physical body definitely
in the musculature like you can tell
there's lots of people did it um the guy
who invented micro expression that whole
Theory his teacher
I understood this as well but you can
look at the way somebody holds their
musculature and their musculus you're
holding is based on what emotions they
don't want to feel and you can tell so
much about a person just from that
and you've seen this with like
ESF you've seen it so that like you see
someone's face completely change as it
releases yeah so that that brings us to
I guess the fifth one so we've gone
through
improved decision making we've gone
through uh getting out of unhealthy
patterns including addiction we've
gotten to feeling more intensity more
more sensitivity including to things
like Joy positive emotions and positive
experiences yes and then Effectiveness
it seems like all this sort of comes
together in Effectiveness yeah I would
say Effectiveness and joy there's
another way that it increases the joy in
our experience but let's do
Effectiveness first
ineffectiveness so I would just say
we're more effective when we can do the
things that are uncomfortable for us so
one example of this that I think is like
quite obvious is when you're working
with somebody and you say okay we've got
this new project that we've never done
before they'll do the things that they
know how to do first instead of doing
the things that they don't know how to
do first
that's really really common and it's the
least effective way to go about doing it
in MIT they have a principle that says
you look at the part of the problem that
you understand the least about and you
start your work there and it's the same
in a CEO of a company like it's the
thing they don't want to look at that if
they look at it and they're they'll be
most effective if they look at that
first and so it's the same thing in a
marriage if you are have a marriage and
there's that pink elephant in the room
like to approach that and to talk about
that and to feel into that immediately
as quickly as you can will make you more
effective have a better marriage be
happier be better to each other be more
loving and so
if you're willing to feel and embrace
the intensity
then you're far more willing to go into
the thing that everybody else is
avoiding and you'll be more effective
for it okay yeah that makes a lot of
sense and and coming back to Joy because
I I was sort of combining Joy with
increased sensitivity as a category but
then you say there's something more to
it what was that yeah so I I think like
my most repeated phrase is this phrase
that says the joy is the matriarch of a
family of emotions and she won't come
into a house where her children aren't
welcome
and somebody else once told me it was
kind of like it was like you have like
one or two docs in your port and one
emotion can be there at a time so if you
don't if you're not fluid then Joy never
has a place to come and Park
so that's what I'm speaking to I'm
basically speaking to the fact if you
embrace the intensity and you don't
repress it then you don't get this like
low level of the unfelt emotion sitting
in your life all the time and then
you're moving in your natural state
which is joyful and loving
and so I see this all the time and it's
why when people have these big emotional
movements they feel all this relief they
feel all this joy in the short term but
it's also long-term
people who are joyful are people who can
cry easily people who are joyful are
people who can like are very fluid with
their frustration and anger who can let
their fear move through them really
quickly it's not people who have
repressed the fear like we all can close
our eyes and think about oh that person
repressing the fear
they're kind of anxious all the time
they're not joyful and that person who's
repressing their anger they're kind of
depressed or they're angry all the time
depending on
how they repress it
if they repress a bike or they repress a
bite I'm such a bad person like either
way
you know or the people who repress
sadness all the time it's like they're
that need for Perfection and and that
rigidity that happens in their system
and their whole body
so they have that Joy just happens
naturally when everything else is moving
fluidly yeah it seems like everything
happens more fluidly if everything's
moving fluidly everything in your life
whether it's whether it's Joy or whether
it's motivation or
connection or swiftly moving on from
something that's not working yeah
definitely there's
as compared to like not feeling it and
trying to manage it all the time you
know there's this great saying that I
learned in Venture Capital which is the
amount of
the amount of effort it takes to create
a deal is the amount of effort that you
need to maintain it basically if you
have to do a whole bunch of work to try
to get the deal done then you're going
to have to do a whole bunch of work to
make that deal successful uh that's so
true yeah
it's true and and not just adventure and
like creating a project in a company and
similarly it's like if you have all this
effort to keep your emotions in line and
in check and you know you have to hold
muscularly and emotionally and mentally
it's like that's a lot of effort being
put towards something that isn't
effective that isn't joyful so what are
I'm curious to get like three
integration questions from you that can
help people recognize if they are
embracing or embracing their intensity
or creating it or embracing it yeah well
the best one is right now are you
bracing or embracing
are you embracing or bracing that I
think that's a great question and I I
asked myself that question for there was
a time when I asked on myself that
question like 10 times a day it was like
this beautiful
question that I just like loved asking
myself
um another great integration question
would be like
go and feel go and have a moment of
feeling
an experience like that you don't want
to feel have the feeling of Abandonment
or
and sit with it for like a good like 10
15 minutes and then ask yourself
like what
what was so bad about that what made it
that you didn't get destroyed by it
have the experience that you've been
avoiding your whole life and then ask
yourself what made it that I could
survive that
what made it that I I possibly even feel
better after I felt it
so that's another great way to integrate
this work third way to integrate the
work
I would say uh what are the emotions and
I think feeling them more than labeling
them would be good but what are the
emotions that I
don't want to feel that sends me into my
bad habits
those would be the three yeah beautiful
thank you Joe awesome thank you Brett
good to talk to you again yeah you too
all right I'm gonna finish packing for
the road trip we're truck is halfway
packed all right get to it all right
have fun thanks see ya bye
thanks for listening to the art of
accomplishment if you enjoyed what you
heard today please subscribe and rate US
on your podcast app we'd love your
feedback so feel free to send us
questions or comments you can reach out
to us join our newsletter or check out
our courses at Art of accomplishment.com
[Music]